---
title: Union City Penal Code
layout: default
nav_order: 2
description: Union City Penal Code
---

## Union City Penal Code

Right to Self Defence and Necessity
Any action performed under this section that is contrary to the law that results or is likely to result in death or injury of a person, or damage to property or possessions must be reported to emergency services as soon as it is practicable to do so.
Self Defense and the Defence of Others
Any person may use a justifiable amount of force proportionate to a threat if they reasonably believe that such force would prevent injury, death or the loss of property or possessions.
Necessity
If a person reasonably believes that acting in a way contrary to any law is necessary to prevent injury, death or the loss of property they do not act unlawfully given that their actions are justifiable and proportionate.
Powers of Officers, Security Services and Elected Officials
Right to Arrest
Law enforcement officers may arrest any person who has committed or by probable cause has been suspected of committing a crime. This allows for information to be gathered by an investigation. If enough evidence has not been provided to charge the individual; the individual must be de-arrested and released as soon as it is practical to do so.
Right to Charge
Law enforcement officers may declare someone guilty of an offense(s) by charging them with a crime which has been proven beyond reasonable doubt and through solid evidence (i.e. DNA proof, government witnesses, admissions of guilt. Civilian witness statements alone do not amount to solid evidence). There is no requirement that a charged person has to be imprisoned. When charging someone, the suspect can request a Supervisor (if available) to have their input on the matter.


Use of Force
Law enforcement officers may use any amount of force in the execution of their duties provided that it is reasonable and justifiable.
Issuing of Arrest Warrants
The Union City Police Department may issue a warrant for a person’s arrest, if the officer requesting the warrant holds reasonable belief that the individual named in the warrant has committed a criminal offense.
Issuing of Search Warrants
Search Warrants are only required for properties which are inhabited by private individuals. A search warrant may only be issued for a property when the issuing Law enforcement officer reasonably believes that a crime has been committed and or is currently in the process of being committed on the property.
Right to Stop and Detain
An officer has the power to stop any vehicle that has been used in and or is carrying or being driven by a person who is believed to have committed a crime and or is believed to be in the process of committing a crime. An Officer may also stop any person who is believed to have committed a criminal offense or is in the process of committing a criminal offense. During this time the officer may detain the person(s) involved until the conclusion of the investigation into the offense in question.
Right to Search
Officers may search a vehicle and/or storage container belonging to a detained person if it is believed that the vehicle contains evidence which is believed to be related to a crime that the officer has reasonable belief has been committed inside the vehicle and or a crime in which the vehicle has been used, an officer may also search any person who is detained for anything that the detained person is believed to be in possession of relating to the investigation for which they are detained, Officers may also search any arrested person in their custody for any evidence of a criminal offense.
Right to Enter Private Property
Officers may enter any private property if it is necessary for the execution of their duties, Law enforcement officers may not remain on a Private Property if asked to leave by the property owner unless this would obstruct an investigation into a criminal offense, any officer who fails to do so commits the offense of trespassing.
Right to Restrict Entry to Public Places and Private Property
Officers may restrict access to any place whether public or private if this would aid the Union City Police Department in the execution of their duties. If an access to an area larger than one residential property is to be restricted for longer than 10 minutes authorisation from the most senior officer on duty must be sought. Any person who fails to comply with an order from an officer to leave an area commits the offense of failing to comply with a direction to leave notice.
Punishments
Officers have the power to punish government employees and members of the public, however they must follow the provided punishment below each law, punishments listed are maximum penalties. Permission must be gained by a Lieutenant or higher if an LEO wants to go above the provided maximum punishment. The use of Capital Punishment is not permitted.
Cooperation with other agencies
The emergency services of Union City are obliged to cooperate and work jointly. No other organization or person shall be permitted by any government agency to take an active role in an incident if this would endanger their safety, unless authorized by a member of Police Command.
Illegally or Improperly Obtained Evidence
Illegally or improperly obtained evidence is evidence obtained in violation of a person’s human rights or obtained in breach of the law, policy or procedure,  and it would be unfair or unjust to use it. All charges related to this evidence must be dropped under this law, but any items related to the offense may still be seized by police under asset forfeiture.
Emergency Services or Elected Officials Conduct
Officer’s Discretion
Officers hold a certain power of discretion over any issue however this may be overruled by a higher ranking officer. Any officer of any rank who misuses their power of discretion without holding the best interests of the City into account commits an offense 


Duties of an Officer
Any officer who fails to carry out any of their duties to the best of their ability commits the offense of failing to carry out duties and is liable for punishment. Duties of a Law enforcement officer include but are not limited to acting in the best interests of the city, acting in accordance with the Union City Police Department Code of Ethics, acting in accordance with any orders given to them by an officer who is senior in rank and acting in the safest way possible.
Exemption from Law
A government emergency service worker does not act unlawfully if their actions are contrary to any law and their actions are reasonable, justifiable and proportionate and are necessary for the effective execution of their duties.
General Misconduct in a Public Office
Any elected official or government employee who acts dishonestly and or not in accordance with the best interests of the city commits the offense of misconduct in a public office.
Ransom Payments
No ransom shall be paid by the Union City Police Department unless authorized by the highest ranking officer on duty and it shall not exceed the amount of $10000.
Confiscation
No weapons or evidence shall be confiscated by Law Enforcement when immediate harm is at risk, such as under gun fire or assailants nearby. Evidence is permitted to be confiscated if the officer is unable to watch over the evidence and leaving it where it is would risk it being tampered with by a member of the public.








Financial and Identity Crime
Bribery
No person shall attempt to offer personal payment in any form to any member of the emergency services or an elected official in order to receive immunity, preferential treatment or other such dishonest benefits.
Felony - liable to 3 years maximum imprisonment and $4,000 maximum fine.
Identity Theft
It is an offense to impersonate another person through any means with the intent of committing or concealing a criminal offense or in order to damage their reputation.
Felony - liable to 3 years maximum imprisonment and $4,000 maximum fine.
Fraud
No person shall deliberately deceive another person with the intention of unlawfully depriving them of money, possessions or property.
Felony - liable to 3 years maximum imprisonment, $4,000 maximum fine and asset forfeiture.
Blackmail
Any person who uses information as a form of leverage in order to threaten a person legally, financially, or otherwise, in return for their respective cooperation with any form of demand commits an offense.
Felony - liable to 5 years maximum imprisonment, $4,000 maximum fine and asset forfeiture.
Impersonating Emergency Services or Government Official Personnel
No person should impersonate Emergency Services or Government Official personnel unless they hold a position in either institution.
Felony - liable to 3 years maximum imprisonment and $4,000 maximum fine.


Extortion and Racketeering
It is an offense to attempt to extort money, services, favors, or possessions from others through coercion, intimidation or other menacing behavior.
Felony - Liable to 4 years maximum imprisonment, $4000 fine, and asset forfeiture.
Cooperation with Emergency Services
Provision of False Information
Any person who when asked for information or when offering information to emergency services presents information which is not truthful and complete commits an offense
Misdemeanor - liable to 3 years maximum imprisonment and $2,000 maximum fine.
Destruction of Evidence
No person shall tamper with, destroy or hide evidence relating to a criminal offense.
Felony - liable to 3 years maximum imprisonment, $3,000 maximum fine and asset forfeiture.
Aiding & Abetting
Any person who knowingly provides assistance to a person under detainment, arrest or warrant for arrest other than providing medical assistance or formal legal counsel acts unlawfully. Assistance may be, but is not necessarily limited to advice, action and financial support.
Felony - liable to 5 years maximum imprisonment and $5,000 maximum fine.
Failure to Comply with a Warrant
No person shall fail to comply with the orders detailed within a warrant or obstruct the execution of a warrant.
Misdemeanor - liable to 4 years maximum imprisonment and $4,000 maximum fine.




Cooperation with the Orders of Law Enforcement Personnel
Any person who fails to comply with the legal orders of a Law enforcement officer such as refusing to provide ID when detained or obstructing an officer executing their duties commits an offense.
Felony - liable to 5 years maximum imprisonment and $5,000 maximum fine.
Persons in Need
It is an offense for a person to fail to contact the emergency services when a person is in need of emergency medical care.
Misdemeanor - liable to 3 years maximum imprisonment and $4,000 maximum fine.
Attempting or Planning a Crime
No person shall attempt or plan to commit a crime. A person who does so shall be liable for punishment as if they had committed the offense.
Liable to half of what offense was if committed.
Failure to identify to an Officer
Any person who refuses to give information or withholds information regarding identification of themselves whilst under detainment by an LEO commits an offense.
Misdemeanor - liable to 2 years maximum imprisonment and $3,000 maximum fine.
Failure to stop for a Law Enforcement Officer
Fleeing or attempting to elude a pursuing LEO commits an offense.
Felony - liable to 5 years maximum imprisonment and $4,000 maximum fine.
Obstruction of Emergency Services
Any person who obstructs a member of the emergency services in their duties commits an offense.
Felony - liable to 5 years maximum imprisonment and $4,000 maximum fine.


Offensive Weapons
Possession of Explosives and Incendiaries
It is illegal for a person to manufacture, possess, sell, or transport an explosive or incendiary device.
Felony - liable to 3 years maximum imprisonment, $3,000 maximum fine and asset forfeiture.
Possession of Offensive Weapons
Any person who is in possession of any offensive weapon in a public area without a reasonable excuse commits an offense. Offensive weapons include, but are not necessarily limited to the following, firearms, baseball bats, knives, machetes, or improvised/adapted items with the intent to harm or cause damage.
Misdemeanor - liable to 2 years maximum imprisonment, $2,500 maximum fine and asset forfeiture.
Storage of Offensive Weapons
It is an offense to store an offensive weapon in an insecure place such as a public area or an area easily accessible by the public.
Misdemeanor - liable to 2 years maximum imprisonment, $2,000 maximum fine and asset forfeiture.
Display of Offensive Weapons
Any person who displays an offensive weapon in a public setting commits an offense.
Felony - liable to 2 years maximum imprisonment, $4,000 maximum fine and asset forfeiture.
Sale of Offensive Weapons
Any person who attempts to sell an offensive weapon in a public setting and not in a shop with the proper licence commits an offense.
Felony - liable to 2 years maximum imprisonment, $4,000 maximum fine and asset forfeiture.
Detonation of Explosives and Incendiaries
It is illegal for a person to detonate an explosive or incendiary device.
Felony - liable to 6 years maximum imprisonment and $6,000 maximum fine.
Restricted Substances
Possession of Restricted Substances with Intent to Use
Any restricted substance shall be illegal to possess with the intent to use.
Infraction - liable to $1,500 maximum fine and asset forfeiture.
Possession of Restricted Substances with Intent to Supply
Any restricted substance shall be illegal to possess with the intent to supply others.
Felony - liable to 3 years maximum imprisonment, $4,000 maximum fine and asset forfeiture.
Possession of Restricted Substances with Intent to Produce
Any restricted substance shall be illegal to possess with the intent to produce further narcotics.
Misdemeanor - liable to 4 years maximum imprisonment, $4,000 maximum fine and asset forfeiture.
Possession of Restricted Substances with Intent to Transport
Any restricted substance shall be illegal to possess with the intent to transport.
Misdemeanor - liable to 2 years maximum imprisonment, $2,000 maximum fine and asset forfeiture.




Violent Crime
Physical Assault
Any person who applies or causes reckless injury to another person commits an offense.
Felony - liable to 5 years maximum imprisonment and $5,000 maximum fine.
Physical Assault with an Offensive Weapon
Any person who applies or causes reckless injury to another person with any type of offensive weapon as defined in law, that is likely to cause great bodily injury commits an offense.
Felony - liable to 8 years maximum imprisonment and $7,000 maximum fine.
Threat of Physical Harm
Any person who causes another person to be in fear of physical assault as defined above by verbal, physical, emotional or other forms of intimidation acts unlawfully.
Felony - liable to 3 years maximum imprisonment and $2,500 maximum fine.
Unlawful Detainment
The detainment of a person against their will unless the person has committed a criminal offense or their detainment is in order to facilitate their apprehension by law enforcement officers.
Felony - liable to 4 years maximum imprisonment and $3,000 maximum fine.
Murder
No person shall take the life of another person with the intent of causing death or severe injury.
Felony - liable to 10 years maximum imprisonment and $10,000 maximum fine.




Manslaughter
No person shall take the life of another person through negligence.
Felony - liable to 7 years maximum imprisonment and $7,000 maximum fine.
Sexual Offenses
Any person who coerces another person through force, threats or abuse of authority forces another person into performing a sexual act commits an offense.
Felony - liable to 5 years maximum imprisonment and $4,000 maximum fine.
Reckless Endangerment
Any person whose actions put another person at serious risk of harm and / or death are guilty of this offense, regardless of if the endangered person is harmed or not, or if they’re willingly participating in these actions.
Felony - Liable to 4 years imprisonment and $4000 maximum fine and asset forfeiture.
Non-Violent Conduct
Harassment, Alarm or Distress
It is an offense for a person to display behavior that is likely to cause harassment, alarm or distress. This includes but is not limited to visual representations such as signs or text messages
Misdemeanor - liable to 4 years maximum imprisonment and $3,000 maximum fine.
Failing to report a crime
It is illegal for a person who witnesses or has knowledge of the committing of a criminal offense to fail to contact the police as soon as is practicable following the offense.
Felony - liable to 3 years maximum imprisonment and $3,500 maximum fine.




Inappropriate use of Emergency Services
Any person who misuses the emergency services such as by hoax calling the 911 service commits an offense.
Infraction - liable to $5,000 maximum fine.
Property and Possession Crime
Obstruction of Property Access
It is illegal to use objects, your person or threatening behavior to prevent access to either a public area or private property, to a person authorized to enter the area in question.
Misdemeanor - liable to 3 years maximum imprisonment and $1,500 maximum fine.
Vandalism
Any person who damages, defaces or alters a property or possession without the permission of the owner.
Misdemeanor - liable to 2 years maximum imprisonment and $2,000 maximum fine.
Trespassing
Any person who enters private property without permission of the owner or publicly restricted area without the use of force or causing damage to possessions or the property.
Misdemeanor - liable to 3 years maximum imprisonment and $3,000 maximum fine.
Burglary
Any person who enters a property or any part of a property with the intention to commit theft, cause unlawful damage or to inflict unlawful serious injury.
Felony - liable to 6 years maximum imprisonment, $6,000 maximum fine and asset forfeiture.


Theft
Any person who dishonestly appropriates any possession belonging to another person commits a criminal offense.
Misdemeanor - liable to 3 years maximum imprisonment, $3,000 maximum fine and asset forfeiture.
Arson
Any person who willfully and maliciously or recklessly sets fire to a property commits a criminal offense.
Felony - liable to 6 years maximum imprisonment and $5,000 maximum fine.
Loitering
Any person who remains in a public area for a prolonged period of time without any apparent lawful purpose commits a criminal offense.
Infraction - liable to $2,000 maximum fine.
Discharging a Firearm
Any person who discharges their firearm in a public or private property, unless for Self Defence and the Defence of Others commits an offense.
Infraction - liable to $2,000 maximum fine, and asset forfeiture.
Robbery
Any person who steals, and immediately before or at the time of doing so, uses force on any person or seeks to put any person in fear of being then and there subjected to force.
Felony - liable to 7 years maximum imprisonment, $7,000 maximum fine and asset forfeiture.
Aggravated Burglary
Any person who commits a burglary and at the time has with them any firearm or imitation firearm, any offensive weapon, or any explosive.
Felony - liable to 9 years maximum imprisonment, $9,000 maximum fine and asset forfeiture.
Road Offences
Jaywalking
It is an offense to cross or enter a public road on foot via any crossing point other than those designated by road markings or signage.
Infraction - liable to $750 maximum fine.
Speeding
Vehicles may not exceed the posted speed limit on a public road (55 MPH)
Infraction - liable to $1,500 maximum fine.
Traffic lights
Drivers of vehicles should always come to a complete stop at a red traffic light. The right on red exception permits drivers to pass through a red light if they are making a right turn, providing it is safe to do so. When meeting an amber traffic light, drivers must come to a complete stop if it is safe and possible to do so.
Infraction - liable to $2,000 maximum fine.
Parking
Vehicles may not be parked on public roads, sidewalks, pathways or any other public area not intended for parking unless designated by the parking road markings.
Infraction - liable to $1,000 maximum fine and asset forfeiture.
Road Markings and Signage
Drivers of vehicles must drive in accordance with road markings and signage.
Infraction - liable to $1,000 maximum fine.
Vehicle Maintenance
It is the responsibility of the driver to ensure that the vehicle is free of faults or defects. Any person who drives a vehicle in an unroadworthy condition acts unlawfully.
Infraction - liable to $2,000 maximum fine and asset forfeiture.
Emergency Vehicles
Upon the approach of an emergency vehicle with its lights or sirens activated drivers must pull to the rightmost side of the road to allow the vehicle to pass.If the vehicle remains behind them they must come to a stop at the nearest safe location.
Infraction - liable to $2,000 maximum fine.
Collisions
Drivers involved in a collision with any person or object must stop at the scene of the incident and inform the police of the incident.
Misdemeanor - liable to $2,500 maximum fine and 3 years maximum imprisonment.
Headlights
Headlights must be used in situations where there is reduced visibility such as night time or in foggy conditions.
Infraction - liable to $1,000 maximum fine.
Indicators and Hazard Lights
Drivers must activate the appropriate indicator prior to crossing a lane or joining a new road. Drivers must also activate their hazard lights if their vehicle presents an unavoidable hazard to other road users.
Infraction - liable to $1,000 maximum fine.
Driving Without Due Care and Attention
Drivers must exercise complete care and attention when operating a vehicle.
Misdemeanor - liable to 3 years maximum imprisonment and $2,000 maximum fine.
Reckless Driving
Any person who drives any vehicle with disregard for the safety of persons or property is guilty of this offense.
Misdemeanor - liable to 4 years maximum imprisonment, $3,500 maximum fine and asset forfeiture.
Driving under the influence
Drivers must not operate a vehicle when they are impaired by alcohol or any restricted drug.
Misdemeanor - liable to 3 years maximum imprisonment and $2,000 maximum fine.
Right of way
Where not overridden by road markings, signage or other such signals, vehicles must give way at intersections and junctions to vehicles approaching from their right.
Infraction - liable to $2,000 maximum fine.
